# SNOBOL4, Part 1

I recently came across a mention of this old language, one I used many years ago, and I thought it would be interesting to revisit it and see how well it holds up against the popular languages of today.

> We're used to many languages looking and behaving in a very similar way. When you come down to it, a lot of the concepts in Java, C# and C++ are pretty similar: classes, exceptions, generics. Sure, there are a lot of differences, but they have a *lot* in common. But when you go back to the early days of programming you'll find languages that are highly individual, where you might be left having to dig just to understand the syntax. I find those interesting to explore.

So what is it? It's a language developed for string manipulation, and the first version came out of Bell Labs in 1962. And why is it at all interesting? As well as quite a few interesting quirks, it has amazing support for pattern matching, far better and more complete than most modern languages, and was widely used for complex text processing tasks. You wouldn't use it as a general purpose language, but for text processing there was little better.

The first thing to note is that it's old, really old. So old that the two output streams are `OUTPUT` for printing, and `PUNCH` for getting your output on punched cards. That's also why it's all in capitals - the luxury of lower-case didn't come along till later.

The second thing to note is that it was invented way before structured programming and OO, and control flow is, how shall I say, _interesting_ if you're being polite, _weird_ if you're being a little less polite, and most programmers would possibly say _dangerously nuts_.

We're talking about a "goto's and labels" language, but one in which every statement can end with a branch instruction. Think about that for a minute... every statement. Here's a simple example:

```
LOOP	OUTPUT = INPUT	: S(LOOP)
END
```

- `LOOP` is a statement label
- `INPUT` and `OUTPUT` are the standard input and output streams. When it was invented these would have been card reader and line printer.
- `OUTPUT = INPUT` reads a line and copies it to the output
- `END` is a keyword identifying the end of the program
- `:S(LOOP)` says that if the operation was successful jump to `LOOP`. If it wasn't, fall through to the `END`. This will copy input to output  until the end of the input stream.

There is, of course, also an `F()` clause that says where to go in the event of failure, and you can have both on one statement. 

And just to add to the fun, the destination label can be evaluated at run time:

```
	N = N + 1	:($('PHASE' N))
```

There's no concatenation operator: strings are concatenated by separating them with spaces, and conversion between types is handled automatically. So when the statement is evaluated, if `N` is 5, execution will jump to the label `PHASE5`. What could possibly go wrong?

That's it for this part. Next, we'll see how to get it running and execute a simple program.
