# C++ Survival Guide
So, maybe not a book (or not yet, anyway).

Some thoughts for devs who aren't C++ programmers, but who find themselves having to work with, or even maintain, a C++ code base. The world has a lot of C++, some of it old and gnarly, but a lot of which is still in use doing important jobs. Finding yourself faced with a large C++ code base can raise a lot of questions, such as "how do I even build and run this?" to "what unit test tools should I use?" and "pointers? I've met them, but what are smart pointers?".

I'm hoping to give you some insight into how to work with one of the most complex programming languages around (and seemingly one that's getting more complex with every release) that's been used to write extremely complex code.

Assumptions:  
- You write production code, maybe in Java, Go, Rust, C#, or even Javascript
- You're used to working with larger codebases
- You're basically familiar with build tools
- You might know something about OO

If you've done any C, then you have a head start with concepts such as pointers, but it isn't necessary to know C before learning C++. In fact, it can makeit harder for many people.

Here's how I'm thinking of dividing things up, but it will change, because as we know no battle plan survives first contact with the enemy:  

1. The Territory
  - A very brief history
  - Versions
  - What are you going to come across?
2. C++, The Language
  - The essentials explained using 'Hello world!'
  - Approaching a large codebase
3. The Build Process
  - Compiling and linking
4. Tooling: Compilers
  - The main contenders: g++, clang, msvc
5. Tooling: Build Tools
  - make
  - CMake
  - ninja
  - Conan
6. Dev Tools
  -IDEs: CLion, Visual Studio, VS Code
  - Testing: Google Test and Mock
  - Debugging and profiling tools
7. Debugging and Profiling
  - An intro to GDB
  - Basic profiling
8. Libraries
  - The Standard Library
  - Boost
  - Other common third-party libraries
9. Old School Code
  - Classic OO
  - Pointers everywhere
  - Common patterns
10. Modern C++
  - Templates everywhere
  - C++11 features
  - C++17 features
  - Mentioning C++20


