# SNOBOL4, Part 3

Let's start looking at the syntax. This language predates structured programming, so we're dealing with jumps and labels.

The format of a statement is

```
[label]  code [: branches] [sequence]
```
Where

- `label` is an optional statement label
- `code` is what it says, must be preceded by whitespace if no label
- `branches` are the optional success/fail options
- `sequence` is an optional sequence number

Notice the 'branches'. Statements can succeed of fail. and you can use the branch options to tell the code where to go next. In effect, every line can be surrounded by an `if` with `goto`s, which can make for very dense code indeed and is pretty much the exact opposite of the structured approach.

A branch can take three forms:

- `T(LABEL)` to go to `LABEL` on success
- `F(LABEL)` to go to `LABEL` on failure
- `(LABEL)` to branch unconditionally

You won't use the sequence nowadays. This language started in the days of punched cards, and you could put sequence numbers into columns 72-80 of an 80 column punched card. This could help you put your program back into the right order should you accidentally drop the deck on the floor.

A statement with an asterisk in column 1 is a comment; you can't add comments to the end of code lines.

The basic types are there - integers, floats and strings - along with the usual arithmetic operators. The set also includes exponentiation, denoted by `**` or (rather confusingly) `!`, and this is the only arithmetic operator that is right associative. Blanks are required around operators such as `+` and `=`, and like Python, string literals can be enclosed in single or double quotes, as long as they match. The 'null string' has length zero; it is the initial value for all variables.

There's no explicit typing, and values are converted as appropriate. If a string represents a number, it can be used in arithmetic expressions like so, where `X` ends up with the value `-39.4`:

```
    Z = '10'
    X = 5 * -Z + '10.6'
```

Strings are concatenated by separating them with spaces, and numbers will be converted and concatenated into the string, like this:

```
  ROW = 'K'
  NO. = 22
  SEAT = ROW NO.
```

Which ends up with `SEAT` having the value `'K22'`. 

> Variable names must start with a letter, and can consist of letters, numerals, underscore and period
